Add announcement CZI EOSS6 (#190)
scikit-learn/blog: _posts/2024-08-06-czi-eoss6-announcement.md

---
title: "Chan Zuckerberg Initiative considers scikit-learn an Essential Open Source Software"
date: August 6, 2024
categories:
  - Funding
tags:
  - Open Source
  - Funding
  - Internship
  - Diversity
featured-image: sklearn_czi.png

postauthors:
  - name: Guillaume Lemaitre
    website: https://github.com/glemaitre
    image: guillaume-lemaitre.jpg
  - name: Lucy Liu
    website: https://github.com/lucyleeow
    image: lucyliu.jpeg
---
<div>
  <img src="/assets/images/posts_images/{{ page.featured-image }}" alt="">
  {% include postauthor.html %}
</div>

> We are delighted to announce that `scikit-learn` is awarded a grant from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are delighted to announce that `scikit-learn` has been awarded a grant from
```
or maybe "was awarded"?

the [Chan Zuckerberg Initiative (CZI)](https://chanzuckerberg.com/)'s [Essential Open
Source Software for Science
(EOSS)](https://chanzuckerberg.com/rfa/essential-open-source-software-for-science/)
program. This grant is funded by [Wellcome Trust](https://wellcome.org/).

> As in previous round, this cycle supports open-source software projects that are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As in previous rounds, this cycle supports open-source software projects that are
```

essential to biomedical research. This is the third time that CZI EOSS supports
`scikit-learn`. In previous rounds, the following projects were funded:

- [CZI EOSS 1](https://chanzuckerberg.com/eoss/proposals/scikit-learn-maintenance-and-enhancement-for-gradient-boosting/)

>   helped at creating to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  helped create the
```

  [`HistGradientBoostingClassifier`](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.HistGradientBoostingClassifier.html) and
  [`HistGradientBoostingRegressor`](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.HistGradientBoostingRegressor.html) estimators.

>   These estimators are the equivalent of gradient boosting models implemented in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  These estimators are equivalent to the gradient boosting models implemented in
```

  `LightGBM` and `XGBoost`.
- [CZI EOSS 4](https://chanzuckerberg.com/eoss/proposals/maintenance-extension-of-scikit-learn-machine-learning-in-python/)

>   extended `scikit-learn` to work better with missing values and categorical data in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  extended `scikit-learn` to improve handling of missing values and categorical data in
```

  several estimators.

Both grants allowed us to maintain and enhance `scikit-learn` to better serve the
community.

> In this new grant, we will focus on improving the evaluation and inspection of

Reviewer: Should we move this further up? It seems like telling the reader what this grant is about is the most important thing in this article?

But also, telling people about the amazing hist gradient boosting is important :-/

Author: Yep, I had also some doubts about the structure. Let me move the past grants in a section at the end of the post.

> predictive models. We provide in the next section a detailed description of the
> proposed work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
predictive models. In the next section we will describe the
proposed work.
```

## Predictive models evaluation & inspection

When building a machine learning pipeline for a specific research problem, two key
aspects are closely connected: (i) design the pipeline and (ii) assess, analyze, and
inspect it. Researchers strive to identify the optimal pipeline, maximizing specific
evaluation metrics, while also seeking at explaining the validity and rationale behind

> the pipeline's predictions. This is the corner stone to properly answering research

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the pipeline's predictions. This is the cornerstone of answering research
```

I think it is "cornerstone of", if we want to say "... to" we need something like "key to". I'd stick with cornerstone. Removed "properly" because it didn't read great somehow and I couldn't think of a way to shuffle things around

questions. With this proposal we aim to improve and extend the available `scikit-learn`
tools.

`scikit-learn` provides building blocks for model evaluation and statistical analysis of
results. Originally, this information was presented in a raw format and required

> expertise from scientists to create intuitive supports for outreach to peers and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
expertise from scientists to create intuitive reports for outreach to peers and
```
Guessing this should be "report"? Pretty sure "supports" isn't the right word here.

(iii) model explainability. First, during the training of a pipeline, researchers are
interested in monitoring the internal characteristics of the model and it is a not yet
addressed long-standing issue in `scikit-learn`. We want to build upon some initial work
by implementing a "callback" framework that allows users to track these internal
parameters. Next, researchers commonly use interactive tools such as Jupyter Notebook to
develop pipelines. `scikit-learn` started some efforts to visually and interactively
display pipelines in these environments. However, there is room for improvement in terms
of user interaction and accessibility. Finally, as `scikit-learn` is widely used as a
reference package, it is crucial to improve the section of the library dedicated to
model explainability. We aim to improve the documentation and user experience with the
existing explainability tools, making sure that they use the appropriate tool for their
use cases.

On top of all these items, we intend to continue working on the general maintenance of
the project, addressing bug reports and performance regressions. As a community-driven

> project, we want to dedicate time reviewing external contributions.\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
project, we want to dedicate time reviewing external contributions.
```

aspects are closely connected: (i) design the pipeline and (ii) assess, analyze, and
inspect it. Researchers strive to identify the optimal pipeline, maximizing specific
evaluation metrics, while also seeking at explaining the validity and rationale behind
the pipeline's predictions. This is the cornerstone of answering research
questions. With this proposal we aim to improve and extend the available `scikit-learn`
tools.

`scikit-learn` provides building blocks for model evaluation and statistical analysis of
results. Originally, this information was presented in a raw format and required
expertise from scientists to create intuitive reports for outreach to peers and
outsiders. Recently, the `scikit-learn` community developed displays to easily generate
visual figures for communicating such results. However, these displays are still in
their early development stages and do not leverage all available statistical analysis
tools (i.e., cross-validation) from `scikit-learn`. Thus, we aim to expand these
displays to use the right statistical tools and thus promote the adoption of best
practices when reporting results. Additionally, we also intend to create new displays

> that are considered as "standards" during such analyses.

Reviewer 2: Are you saying that the new displays will be 'standard' (i.e., commonly used/well-established in the field) or that using the new displays will become standard practice in people's analysis workflows?

Author: Let me reformulate it but I wanted to say that there is "standard" analysis and we are going to implement displays to depict visually those analysis.

Reviewer 2: Perfect, it looks great!

---

> title: "Scikit-learn awarded CZI EOSS Cycle 6 Grant"

Author: I took the second version: this is more than an extension since this is a new proposal :).

---
title: "Scikit-learn awarded CZI EOSS Cycle 6 Grant"
date: August 6, 2024
categories:
  - Funding
tags:
  - Open Source

>   - Sponsor

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - Funding
```

Author: Thanks.

interested in monitoring the internal characteristics of the model and it is a not yet
addressed long-standing issue in `scikit-learn`. We want to build upon some initial work
by implementing a "callback" framework that allows users to track these internal
parameters. Next, researchers commonly use interactive tools such as Jupyter Notebook to
develop pipelines. `scikit-learn` started some efforts to visually and interactively
display pipelines in these environments. However, there is room for improvement in terms
of user interaction and accessibility. Finally, as `scikit-learn` is widely used as a
reference package, it is crucial to improve the section of the library dedicated to
model explainability. We aim to improve the documentation and user experience with the
existing explainability tools, making sure that they use the appropriate tool for their
use cases.

On top of all these items, we intend to continue working on the general maintenance of
the project, addressing bug reports and performance regressions. As a community-driven
project, we want to dedicate time reviewing external contributions.

## References

> [1] [Scikit-learn proposal for CZI EOSS
> 6](https://github.com/scikit-learn/administrative/blob/master/czi_eoss_proposal/EOSS6-0000000551_202312181059.pdf)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[1] [Scikit-learn proposal for CZI EOSS
6](https://github.com/scikit-learn/administrative/blob/master/czi_eoss_proposal/EOSS6-0000000551_202312181059.pdf)
[x] [Prior CZI EOSS grants](https://chanzuckerberg.com/science/programs-resources/open-science/grants/)
```

Author: Uhm I'm not interested in citing the full list of grants. What is the reasoning?

Reviewer 3: It looks like the URL doesn't include the filtering for scikit-learn, so the individual grant links will do.

Author: I linked each proposal to the CZI pages instead of having references.
